docs/performance.md, before:

# Performance Optimization

### Performance strategy for the Revista project

---

## Overview

The performance strategy for this site addresses multiple aspects of web performance:

1. **Network optimization**: Reducing file sizes and request counts
2. **Rendering optimization**: Ensuring fast page rendering and minimal layout shifts
3. **Resource prioritization**: Loading critical resources first
4. **Caching strategy**: Effective use of browser and CDN caching

## Optimization Techniques

### Astro's Islands Architecture

The project leverages Astro's islands architecture to minimize JavaScript:

- Static HTML rendering for most content
- Selective hydration only where needed (with `client:idle`, `client:visible` directives)
- Example: The ThemeToggle component only hydrates itself, not the entire page

```astro
<!-- Only this component gets JavaScript -->
<ThemeToggle client:idle />

<!-- These remain static HTML -->
<Navigation />
<SiteTitle />
```

### Image Optimization

#### Size and Format Optimization

Images are processed through Astro's built-in image optimization:

```javascript
// Masonry.astro
const imageAssets = await Promise.all(
  images.map(async (image) => {
    if (image) {
      return await getImage({
        src: image.src,
        width: 3840, // Maximum quality size
        height: 2160, // Maintains aspect ratio
        format: "avif", // Optimal compression format
        loading: "lazy", // Defer loading of off-screen images
        decoding: "async", // Allow browser to decode image asynchronously
      });
    }
    return null;
  }),
);
```

Benefits:

- AVIF format reduces file size by ~50% compared to JPEG
- Proper width/height attributes prevent Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)
- Lazy loading defers off-screen image loading

### Code Optimization

#### Bundle Size Reduction

Tailwind CSS v4 automatically detects content sources, generating only the CSS actually used on the page. No explicit `content` configuration is needed — the framework scans `src/` automatically.

#### Resource Hints

Astro's prefetch directive optimizes navigation:

```javascript
// astro.config.mjs
prefetch: {
  prefetchAll: true,
  defaultStrategy: "viewport",
},
```

This configuration:

- Prefetches pages when links enter the viewport
- Speeds up perceived navigation time
- Prioritizes likely navigation targets

## CDN Integration

The site is deployed to Cloudflare Workers with Static Assets for edge caching:

### Caddy Configuration

The Docker container uses Caddy with zstd + gzip compression and precompressed asset delivery:

```
:80 {
    encode zstd gzip
    root * /usr/share/caddy
    try_files {path} {path}/ /404.html
    file_server {
        precompressed zstd br gzip
    }
}
```

Benefits:

- zstd compression for better ratios than gzip alone
- Precompressed asset serving (if `.zst`, `.br`, or `.gz` files exist, Caddy serves those directly)
- No explicit cache/security headers needed - Cloudflare handles that at the edge

### Edge Deployment

The project deploys to multiple edge platforms:

1. **Cloudflare Workers (with Static Assets)**: Main deployment with global edge distribution
2. **Deno Deploy**: Secondary deployment for additional edge presence
3. **GitHub Pages**: Tertiary deployment for GitHub-hosted access

## Mobile Optimization

### Responsive Grid Adjustments

The Masonry layout adapts for mobile with optimized configurations:

```css
@media (max-width: 768px) {
  .masonry {
    grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(150px, 1fr));
  }

  /* Reset spanning on smaller screens for simpler layout */
  .image-container:nth-child(3n),
  .image-container:nth-child(4n) {
    grid-row: auto;
    grid-column: auto;
  }
}

@media (max-width: 480px) {
  .masonry {
    grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(100px, 1fr));
  }
}
```

This creates:

- Smaller grid cells on mobile to fit more content
- Simplified layout patterns to avoid complex reflows
- Better touch-friendly spacing

## Build Process Optimization

The project uses Bun for faster builds:

```json
"scripts": {
  "build": "astro build",
  "postbuild": "pagefind --site dist"
},
```

Build optimizations in `astro.config.mjs`:

```javascript
build: {
  concurrency: 4, // Parallelized build process
  measuring: {
    entryBuilding: true,
    pageGeneration: true,
    bundling: true,
    rendering: true,
    assetProcessing: true,
  },
},
```

These settings provide:

- Parallelized build processes
- Performance metrics for build optimization
- Efficient asset processing

## Monitoring and Metrics

The project is regularly tested for performance using:

- Lighthouse scores for overall performance
- Web Vitals metrics (LCP, INP, CLS)
- Network waterfall analysis

Key metrics targeted:

- **LCP (Largest Contentful Paint)**: Under 2.5s
- **INP (Interaction to Next Paint)**: Under 200ms
- **CLS (Cumulative Layout Shift)**: Under 0.1

Commit message:

feat: improve HeroImage perf and UX, document depth parallax research
- Rewrite scroll parallax: rAF-batched loop with lerp easing, idles
  when settled, gated by IntersectionObserver
- Switch from CSS background-image to <img> with fetchPriority/decoding
- Add fade-in on image load with hydration-safe complete check
- Add text shadow + gradient overlay for legibility on bright photos
- Respect prefers-reduced-motion
- Document depth-based parallax research (tried and abandoned):
  raymarching, Ken Burns, color grading, mouse wobble all produced
  artifacts or altered photographs unacceptably

docs/performance.md, after:

# Performance Optimization

### Performance strategy for the Revista project

---

## Overview

The performance strategy for this site addresses multiple aspects of web performance:

1. **Network optimization**: Reducing file sizes and request counts
2. **Rendering optimization**: Ensuring fast page rendering and minimal layout shifts
3. **Resource prioritization**: Loading critical resources first
4. **Caching strategy**: Effective use of browser and CDN caching

## Optimization Techniques

### Astro's Islands Architecture

The project leverages Astro's islands architecture to minimize JavaScript:

- Static HTML rendering for most content
- Selective hydration only where needed (with `client:idle`, `client:visible` directives)
- Example: The ThemeToggle component only hydrates itself, not the entire page

```astro
<!-- Only this component gets JavaScript -->
<ThemeToggle client:idle />

<!-- These remain static HTML -->
<Navigation />
<SiteTitle />
```

### Image Optimization

#### Size and Format Optimization

Images are processed through Astro's built-in image optimization:

```javascript
// Masonry.astro
const imageAssets = await Promise.all(
  images.map(async (image) => {
    if (image) {
      return await getImage({
        src: image.src,
        width: 3840, // Maximum quality size
        height: 2160, // Maintains aspect ratio
        format: "avif", // Optimal compression format
        loading: "lazy", // Defer loading of off-screen images
        decoding: "async", // Allow browser to decode image asynchronously
      });
    }
    return null;
  }),
);
```

Benefits:

- AVIF format reduces file size by ~50% compared to JPEG
- Proper width/height attributes prevent Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)
- Lazy loading defers off-screen image loading

### Code Optimization

#### Bundle Size Reduction

Tailwind CSS v4 automatically detects content sources, generating only the CSS actually used on the page. No explicit `content` configuration is needed — the framework scans `src/` automatically.

#### Resource Hints

Astro's prefetch directive optimizes navigation:

```javascript
// astro.config.mjs
prefetch: {
  prefetchAll: true,
  defaultStrategy: "viewport",
},
```

This configuration:

- Prefetches pages when links enter the viewport
- Speeds up perceived navigation time
- Prioritizes likely navigation targets

## CDN Integration

The site is deployed to Cloudflare Workers with Static Assets for edge caching:

### Caddy Configuration

The Docker container uses Caddy with zstd + gzip compression and precompressed asset delivery:

```
:80 {
    encode zstd gzip
    root * /usr/share/caddy
    try_files {path} {path}/ /404.html
    file_server {
        precompressed zstd br gzip
    }
}
```

Benefits:

- zstd compression for better ratios than gzip alone
- Precompressed asset serving (if `.zst`, `.br`, or `.gz` files exist, Caddy serves those directly)
- No explicit cache/security headers needed - Cloudflare handles that at the edge

### Edge Deployment

The project deploys to multiple edge platforms:

1. **Cloudflare Workers (with Static Assets)**: Main deployment with global edge distribution
2. **Deno Deploy**: Secondary deployment for additional edge presence
3. **GitHub Pages**: Tertiary deployment for GitHub-hosted access

## Mobile Optimization

### Responsive Grid Adjustments

The Masonry layout adapts for mobile with optimized configurations:

```css
@media (max-width: 768px) {
  .masonry {
    grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(150px, 1fr));
  }

  /* Reset spanning on smaller screens for simpler layout */
  .image-container:nth-child(3n),
  .image-container:nth-child(4n) {
    grid-row: auto;
    grid-column: auto;
  }
}

@media (max-width: 480px) {
  .masonry {
    grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(100px, 1fr));
  }
}
```

This creates:

- Smaller grid cells on mobile to fit more content
- Simplified layout patterns to avoid complex reflows
- Better touch-friendly spacing

## Build Process Optimization

The project uses Bun for faster builds:

```json
"scripts": {
  "build": "astro build",
  "postbuild": "pagefind --site dist"
},
```

Build optimizations in `astro.config.mjs`:

```javascript
build: {
  concurrency: 4, // Parallelized build process
  measuring: {
    entryBuilding: true,
    pageGeneration: true,
    bundling: true,
    rendering: true,
    assetProcessing: true,
  },
},
```

These settings provide:

- Parallelized build processes
- Performance metrics for build optimization
- Efficient asset processing

## Hero Image Optimization

The `HeroImage` component (`src/components/HeroImage.tsx`) renders the fullscreen parallax hero on content pages. Key optimizations:

### Scroll Performance

- **rAF-batched rendering**: Scroll events trigger a `requestAnimationFrame` loop instead of writing to `style.transform` on every scroll event, avoiding layout thrashing
- **Idle when settled**: The rAF loop self-terminates when the lerp reaches its target, restarting only on the next scroll event — no wasted frames
- **Smooth lerp easing**: Parallax position interpolates toward the target (`lerpSpeed = 0.1`) for fluid motion instead of 1:1 mechanical scroll tracking
- **IntersectionObserver gating**: The scroll listener and rAF loop only run while the hero is in the viewport; `willChange: transform` is toggled accordingly

### Image Loading

- **`<img>` instead of `background-image`**: Uses real `<img>` elements with `fetchPriority="high"` and `decoding="sync"`, giving the browser proper resource prioritization hints that CSS backgrounds don't support
- **Fade-in on load**: Images start at `opacity: 0` and transition over 700ms on load, preventing the white flash during image decode
- **Hydration-safe**: On mount, checks `img.complete` to handle images that loaded before React hydration (cached or fast network), preventing images from staying invisible

### Accessibility

- **`prefers-reduced-motion`**: Parallax is completely disabled when the user has motion reduction enabled
- **Text legibility**: Subtle gradient overlay (top/bottom darkening) and text shadows ensure title/tag readability across all hero images without altering the photograph
- **Screen reader image**: Hidden `<img>` with alt text preserved for accessibility

## Monitoring and Metrics

The project is regularly tested for performance using:

- Lighthouse scores for overall performance
- Web Vitals metrics (LCP, INP, CLS)
- Network waterfall analysis

Key metrics targeted:

- **LCP (Largest Contentful Paint)**: Under 2.5s
- **INP (Interaction to Next Paint)**: Under 200ms
- **CLS (Cumulative Layout Shift)**: Under 0.1
